Nigerian Law Expert

1. Project Overview

Nigerian Law Expert is a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) application built to answer questions using the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria as its knowledge base.

The system combines document processing, semantic embeddings, vector similarity search, and a generative language model. The application consists of a Python backend and web frontend and was deployed using Render.

2. Knowledge Base

The source document was the Nigerian Constitution stored as:

`data/nigeria_constitution.pdf`

The relevant constitutional content was extracted from pages 23–214, before the Schedules.

The document contained 318 constitutional sections, which were processed into smaller text units for retrieval.

3. Document Processing

The extracted constitutional text was divided into overlapping chunks.

The configuration used was:

Chunk size: 1,000 characters
Overlap: 150 characters
Final chunks: 558

The overlap was used to preserve context when information spans the boundary between two chunks.

The resulting chunks were stored in `chunks.pkl`.

4. Text Embeddings

Each chunk was converted into a numerical vector using:

BAAI/bge-small-en-v1.5

This converts constitutional text into embeddings that represent its semantic meaning.

The same embedding model is later used to convert a user's question into a vector, allowing the question to be compared with the constitutional content based on semantic similarity rather than exact keyword matching.

5. Vector Indexing

The generated embeddings were stored in a FAISS vector index.

The project used:

IndexFlatIP with normalized embeddings.

Because the vectors were normalized, the inner product effectively represents cosine similarity.

The index performs similarity search against the stored constitutional embeddings and returns the chunks with the highest similarity to the user's question.

The completed index was saved as:

`vector.index`

The two retrieval artifacts therefore work together:

* `vector.index` — contains the embedded vectors.
* `chunks.pkl` — contains the corresponding original text.

6. Retrieval Algorithm

The retrieval process begins when a user submits a question.

The question is passed through `BAAI/bge-small-en-v1.5` to produce a query embedding.

The query embedding is then searched against the FAISS `IndexFlatIP` index.

FAISS calculates the similarity between the query vector and the stored constitutional vectors and returns the highest-scoring results.

The returned vector positions are used to retrieve the corresponding text from `chunks.pkl`.

The retrieval pipeline is therefore:

User question → BGE embedding → FAISS similarity search → relevant constitutional chunks

7. Retrieval-Augmented Generation

The retrieved chunks are passed to the generative model together with the user's question.

The project uses Google's Gemini model through the `google.genai` library.

The generation process is:

Question + Retrieved constitutional context → Gemini → Generated response

This means the model receives relevant constitutional material before generating its answer instead of relying only on its pretrained knowledge.

8. Backend

The backend was implemented in Python and handles the complete RAG pipeline.

It loads:

* The FAISS vector index.
* The stored constitutional chunks.
* The embedding model.
* The Gemini API.

The backend can be started with:

`python -m app.main`

It receives questions from the frontend, performs retrieval, sends the retrieved context to Gemini, and returns the generated response.

9. Frontend

A web frontend was developed to provide the user interface.

The frontend sends user questions to the backend and displays the resulting responses.

The frontend therefore handles presentation, while the Python backend handles document retrieval and AI generation.

10. Deployment

The completed application was deployed using Render.

The deployed architecture consists of:

Frontend → Python Backend → Embedding Model → FAISS → Constitutional Context → Gemini → Response

11. Technologies

* Python
* FAISS
* `BAAI/bge-small-en-v1.5`
* Google Gemini
* `google.genai`
* NumPy
* Pickle
* React
* Render

12. Complete Workflow

The complete system operates as follows:

1. Extract the relevant constitutional content from the PDF.
2. Identify the 318 constitutional sections.
3. Split the content into 558 chunks using a 1,000-character size and 150-character overlap.
4. Generate embeddings using `BAAI/bge-small-en-v1.5`.
5. Normalize the embeddings.
6. Store them in a FAISS `IndexFlatIP` index.
7. Save the index as `vector.index`.
8. Save the original chunks as `chunks.pkl`.
9. Convert each user question into an embedding.
10. Perform similarity search against the FAISS index.
11. Retrieve the most relevant constitutional chunks.
12. Pass the question and retrieved context to Gemini.
13. Return the generated response through the web application.

13. Limitations

The system is limited to the constitutional material included in its knowledge base. It does not provide comprehensive coverage of Nigerian legislation, case law, or other legal documents.

Because the final response is generated by an LLM, retrieved constitutional passages should be checked when dealing with legally significant questions.

14. Conclusion

The project implements a complete RAG pipeline using the Nigerian Constitution as a domain-specific knowledge base. It combines semantic embedding, FAISS vector retrieval, contextual generation with Gemini, backend development, frontend development, and cloud deployment in one application.
